Title: Towers of Babel - Or Why do humans abandon cities
----
Author: Dileep
----
Date: November 11th, 2018
----
Tags: culture history ruins ancient angkor wat kushan sewers sanitation nuclear nukes greeks assyrians assyria xenophon khmer cambodia
----
Text:

> After a bit I got bored and just started burying cheap spoons to
baffle the archaeologists of the future.

- Bill Bailey

Xenophon, the famous historical figure, was in full retreat. The greek
army under his command had failed to help Cyrus the younger dethrone
Artaxerxes II from the Achiminid-Persian throne, and now they were on
their long trek back home across the deserts of the middle-east. It
was during this time that they encountered the ruins of huge, ancient
cities, long abandoned. Xenophon was baffled that the existence such
large, impressive ruins in these regions was not known to him, a fact
as queer as the ruins were majestic. He ventured to consult the local
farmers and shephards camping nearby for information. He records
thusly in Anabasis,

> After suffering this defeat, the enemy retired, and the Greeks
marched on safely for the rest of the day. And reached the river
Tigris. There was a large, deserted city there called Larisa, which
in the old days used to be inhabited by the Medes. It had walls
twenty-five feet broad, and a hundred feet high. With a perimeter of
six miles. It was built of bricks made of clay, with a stone base of
twenty feet underneath. From here a day's march of 18 miles, brought
them to a large, undefended fortification, near a city called Mespila,
which was once inhabited by the Medes. The base of this fortification
was made of polished stone, in which, there were many shells. It was
50 feet broad, and 50 feet high. On top of it was built a brick wall
50 feet in breadth, and a 100 feet high. The perimeter of the
fortification was 18 miles.

- Xenophon, during the Greek retreat, Anabasis (The Persian Expedition), 400 BC.

Some of these distances have been converted from the ancient Greek
units. Also, his perimeter estimates were off. But his greatest error
is in identifying the former inhabitants of said cities. The local
villagers living off of the land were said to have been uncertain
about this as well, and had guessed that it could have been the Meads,
as the Medians were known to have ruled over them before the Acheminid
Persians took over. But this was dead wrong. The first city,
identified as Larisa, was in fact the city of Kalhu (the biblical
Nimrud). And the second city (Mespila), was Nineveh, the late capital
of the mighty Assyrian empire, which had reigned continuously from
around 2500 BC to 600 BC.

(image: nineveh_walls.jpg width: 1000 caption: sourced from wikimedia commons)

What Xenophon and his fellow soldiers experienced was a phenomena that
is completely alien to us modern humans. The Greek city-states were a
new, fast-evolving global powerhouse at the time. Contemporary Greeks
would have considered themselves as an advanced civilization at the
leading edge of knowledge, technology, and sophistication. And yet,
these Greeks ran into ancient, crumbling ruins, that were larger, more
imposing, and seemingly more advanced than anything they had seen, or
could even conceive of back home. And even weirder still, that such
majesty had been so thouroughly erased from collective memory, that
not even the local plebeians huddled around a fire in the shelter of
its shadows a mere two centuries later, could tell you who they
belonged to.

(image: Nineveh.jpg width: 1000 caption: Henry Layard's image of Nineveh)

A common conceit amongst all human societies to ever exist, including
our own, has been the belief that "now" is the most advanced period in
human history. That all of history is a constant, unidirectional march
forward towards progress in all areas, and that all previous
iterations of settled existence have been primitive in
comparison. When we dig the earth to reveal the buried remains of
civilizations past, we do not expect to find physical artifacts that
are technologically more advanced than our own. We do not expect to
find, what I call, Numenera. Such an occurrence bursts some serious
bubbles and asks tough existential questions. How could something more
advanced than us, fall? And how could they be completely forgotten?
And could this happen to us?

The question of memory and cultural amnesia is an important one. The
following figure of the world map appears in Jared Diamond's book:
Guns, Germs, and Steel. It is marked with estimated dates for the
first appearance of "humans" (defined by Mr. Diamond in some specific
way) at various locations, as well as the directions of the first
migrations. Most of this occurred at a rather slow pace amongst
hunter-gatherer societies, and quite a bit of it during an Ice Age. A
majority of the spread was very likely a slow diffusion in response to
a strain on local resources due to spiking population densities. And
yet, for the longest time, no one remembered where they came from, or
that there were even people there.

(image: human_migration_ggs.png caption: Spread of humanity, Sourced from Guns, Germs, and Steel by Jared Diamond)

Every formerly-isolated tribe we've ever discovered has had its own,
nearly unique (except in the Jungian sense) creation myth. They have
always described themselves as "The People," and the few neighboring
populations they've had contact with as "The Other." There is almost
never any hint towards the continuity all the way back to Africa, and
rarely, if at all, towards the most recent ancestral place of origin.

And this is not a case for a linear, bio-evolutionary change in the
way humans think about time and record-keeping either. The most recent
date marked on that map is 1000 AD near New Zealand. To quote from
Guns, Germs, and Steel,

> Scattering over the Pacific Ocean beyond New Guinea and Melanesia
are thousands of islands deffering greatly in area, isolation,
elevation, climate, productivity, and geological and biological
resources. For most of human history those islands lay far beyond the
reach of watercraft. Around 1200 BC a group of farming, fishing,
seafaring people from the Bismarck Archipelago north of New Guinea
finally succeeded in reaching some of those islands. Over the
following centuries their descendants colonized virtually every
habitable scrap of land in the Pacific. The process was mostly
complete by 500 AD, with the last few islands settled around or soon
after 1000 AD.
> 
> ...
> 
> Thus, Moriori and Maori societies developed from the same ancestral
society, but along very different lines. The resulting two societies
lost awareness even of each other's existence and did not come into
contact again for many centuries, perhaps for as long as 500
years. Finally, an Australian seal-hunting ship visiting the Chathams
en route to New Zealand brought the news to New Zealand of islands
where "there is an abundance of sea and shellfish; the lakes swarm
with eels; and it is a land of the karaka berry.... The inhabitants
are very numerous, but they do not understand how to fight, and have
no weapons." That news was enough to induce 900 Maori to sail to the
Chathams."

- Jared Diamond, in Guns, Germs, and Steel

The fragmentation of human societies into disjoint island-tribes in
Polynesia that ceased communications with each other, is a modern
replay of the Tower of Babel parable. But this article is primarily
concerned with settled civilizations. Big cities are supposed to be
further downstream from record keeping on the tech tree. Surely,
writing is a prerequisite for the functioning of higher tier
institutions and beureaucracies like trade, taxation, architecture and
city planning, and general resource management. The theory goes that
hunter-gatherers turned in to farmers, leading to specialization and
free time. But this narrative doesn't withstand scrutiny.

(image: indus_writing.jpg caption: A seal from the Indus valley civilization, sourced from (link: https://indusrivervalleycivilizationwhap.weebly.com text: indusrivervalleycivilizationwhap.weebly.com))

Writing systems are believed to have developed independently in the
Fertile Crescent, in China, and in the (link:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQLG0RF5UZY text: Mayan Mesoamerica)
at different times. The earliest writing system ever developed is the
Sumerian cuneiform, and dates back to at least 3000 BC. Most ancient
Sumerian artifacts that bear written inscriptions are rather boring
bureaucratic accounts about trade goods & agreements, or
administrative memos. Only select few court officials were literate,
and writing really wasn't associated with literature the way we think
of it. Not even religious stories made it into written form until at
least thousand years after first usage. The complex mathematical
knowledge that we would assume as a prerequisite for architecture and
city planning seem to have been embodied entirely in ritualistic
actions rather than manuals, and were perhaps passed down only through
specialized, possibly hereditary, vocational apprenticeship (This
might actually be an important point for resolving our dilemma).

The best evidence for constructed human settlements that predate
writing comes from the Turkish tell known as (link:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Göbekli_Tepe text: Göbekli Tepe). The
site consists of several layers of pillared, stone chambers, each
built on top of an older, earlier chamber that had been deliberately
backfilled with gravel, stone tools, and animal bones. The lowest
level thus far excavated has been dated back to about 9100 BC, which
not only predates writing, but also agriculture and animal
husbandry. The dating is based on Radio-carbon dating of charcoal, and
merely puts a conservative bound on how old the actual structures
might be.

(image: 1024px-Göbekli_Tepe,_Urfa.jpg caption: Göbekli Tepe, sourced from wikimedia commons)

Göbekli Tepe is prime fodder for fringe believers of hyper-advanced,
Ice-Age human civilizations. But even without the more fanciful
interpretations, the hard data is confounding in itself. Construction
projects of such scale would have required a massive workforce that
would not have been able to contribute to food-gathering, and would
therefore had to have been fed by others. Such stratification within
human groups was thought to be impossible in non-agrarian times. One
could also muse about the motivations and incentives (economic and
psychological) at play in the investment and time commitment. Also
cute are the simple facts like the fact that the concept of stairs and
elongated benches predate pottery, and are at least 11,000 years
old. The entire wikipedia article on (link:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Göbekli_Tepe text: Göbekli Tepe) is a
must read. The following are some excerpts from the same that bear
relevance to our discussion,

> The reliefs depict mammals such as lions, bulls, boars, foxes,
gazelles and donkeys; snakes and other reptiles, arthropods such as
insects and arachnids; and birds, particularly vultures. At the time
the edifice was constructed, the surrounding country was likely to
have been forested and capable of sustaining this variety of wildlife,
before millennia of settlement and cultivation led to the near–Dust
Bowl conditions prevalent today.

- Sourced from (link:
  https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/gobekli-tepe-the-worlds-first-temple-83613665/
  text: The Smithsonian)

(image: tepe_pillars.jpg caption: Pillars from Göbekli Tepe, sourced from wikimedia commons)

> Few humanoid figures have appeared in the art at Göbekli
Tepe. However, some of the T-shaped pillars have human arms carved on
their lower half, suggesting to site excavator Schmidt that they are
intended to represent the bodies of stylized humans (or perhaps
gods). Loincloths also appear on the lower half of a few pillars. The
horizontal stone slab on top is thought by Schmidt to symbolize
shoulders, which means the figures were left headless. Whether they
were intended to serve as surrogate worshippers, symbolize venerated
ancestors, or represent supernatural, anthropomorphic beings is not
known.

> While the site formally belongs to the earliest Neolithic (PPNA), up
to now no traces of domesticated plants or animals have been
found. The inhabitants are assumed to have been hunters and gatherers
who nevertheless lived in villages for at least part of the year.

> The surviving structures, then, not only predate pottery, metallurgy,
and the invention of writing or the wheel, but were built before the
so-called Neolithic Revolution, i.e., the beginning of agriculture and
animal husbandry around 9000 BCE. But the construction of Göbekli Tepe
implies organization of an advanced order not hitherto associated with
Paleolithic, PPNA, or PPNB societies. Archaeologists estimate that up
to 500 persons were required to extract the heavy pillars from local
quarries and move them 100–500 meters (330–1,640 ft) to the site. The
pillars weigh 10–20 metric tons (10–20 long tons; 11–22 short tons),
with one still in the quarry weighing 50 tons.

> Around the beginning of the 8th millennium BCE Göbekli Tepe lost its
importance. The advent of agriculture and animal husbandry brought new
realities to human life in the area, and the "Stone-age zoo"
(Schmidt's phrase applied particularly to Layer III, Enclosure D)
apparently lost whatever significance it had had for the region's
older, foraging communities. But the complex was not simply abandoned
and forgotten to be gradually destroyed by the elements. Instead, each
enclosure was deliberately buried under as much as 300 to 500 cubic
meters (390 to 650 cu yd) of refuse consisting mainly of small
limestone fragments, stone vessels, and stone tools. Many animal, and
even human, bones have also been identified in the fill. Why the
enclosures were buried is unknown, but it preserved them for
posterity.

> Schmidt engaged in some speculation regarding the belief systems of
the groups that created Göbekli Tepe, based on comparisons with other
shrines and settlements. He assumed shamanic practices and suggested
that the T-shaped pillars represent human forms, perhaps ancestors,
whereas he saw a fully articulated belief in gods only developing
later in Mesopotamia, associated with extensive temples and
palaces. This corresponds well with an ancient Sumerian belief that
agriculture, animal husbandry, and weaving were brought to mankind
from the sacred mountain Ekur, which was inhabited by Annuna deities,
very ancient gods without individual names. Schmidt identified this
story as a primeval oriental myth that preserves a partial memory of
the emerging Neolithic.

So here are some reasons why large settlements that took a lot of time
and effort to build and maintain could be abandoned forever. A slow
but drastic change in local climate and biomass, which could have been
brought about by the increase in population density due to the
settlement itself, or through a competing innovation (agriculture)
rendering the current lifestyle and paradigm unsustainable. The
deliberate backfilling and rebuilding of the presumed religious sites
might also suggest a philosophical outlook (and I am speculating here)
centered on mortality and impermanence that has stay with us to this
day, and is reflected in the ritual burning of low-entropy works of
art at the end of recurring festivals a la Hindu and Shinto religious
processions, as well as Burning Man.

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Md6SuPdA-mo)

What determines the threshold between a cave or village settlement
from a city? A physicist's approach might involve recognizing that all
human activity, including that of mere subsistence, necessarily
consumes resources and excretes waste on some time and length scales
determined by physics and biology. In dispersed, low-density tribes,
all units within the collective have ready access to nature's raw
materials, as well as means of disposal of the often biodegradable
refuse. But as population density starts to increase, the immediate
environment of most individuals who do not dwell at the physical edge
of such settlements, would consist predominantely of other individuals
rather than untamed nature. Therefore, for such densities to be
sustainable, dedicated systems for continuous transfer of resources
into every nook and cranny of the settlement from the outside, as well
as the flow of waste outward, are very necessary. And geometry
dictates that these systems should be fractal-like or dendritic in
structure, much like the fluid-circulatory systems and neural pathways
in living matter, or river topologies in deltas, or indeed, the
physical fiber-optic architecture of the datalines that serve large
computer networks.

(image: cordata_flower_veination.jpg width: 800 caption: Flower veination, sourced from wikimedia commons)

> Water flows in. Shit flows out. It's fucking magic.

- Gabriel Morton

The importance of plumbing and sanitation is often understated as far
as technological milestones go. It is the primary marker for telling
planned and unplanned cities and quarters apart.

(image: sewer1.png caption: Storm drains in Saitama, Japan. Sourced from (link: https://inhabitat.com/new-submission-33/attachment/12638/ text: inhabit.com))

Large settlements needed to nail this aspect of city planning, either
through central planning, or organic kludging, to last any length of
time. There is a reason that Roman aqueducts were attacked by raiding
Germanic tribes during the fall of the Roman Empire. This would also
suggest a great-filter argument for abandonment of cities, whereby a
city would uncontrollably grow until the local population density
exceeded the capacity of its tech level to handle, rendering it more
vulnerable to natural variation in resource and climate conditions
that strained its infrastructure (hence the title of the article). It
is often claimed that up until the 19th century, cities had a lower
birth-rate than death-rate, and had to be sustained by a constant
influx from the rural countryside. It took a revolution in
epidemiology and a raising of public consciousness about the
importance of good sanitation to buck that trend. Virtually the entire
city of Chicago was said to have been raised by over 6 feet, in order
to construct its sewer system, as is detailed in this excellent
video-essay by ApexGames,

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x96BncWmVig width: 600 height: 400)

The good folk at Extra Credits tell a similar story for London,

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TLpzHHbFrHY width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1jlsyucUwpo width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9NVT6iZP2qg width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cba7di0eL8I width: 600 height: 400)

And lest we assume that this is a solved problem, here is a beautiful
piece by Vice Media on waste processing in modern-day New York,

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZiNiBZiR_uA width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EVGdmE4_h4c width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ra47l7fihZU width: 600 height: 400)

A metropolis like New York would immediately come to a stand-still if
the electricity failed, or if the underground transit was shut down
for a day. What's impressive about the Vice piece was the reliance of
these systems on select individuals to function. One could, in
principle, layout all the details and instructions necessary to keep
New York functioning in a massive user's manual. But should key
person's from the city's population suddenly disappear, the remaining
members would scarcely be capable of developing the expertise to
restore everything to normalcy in a timely manner, and the settlement
would have to be abandoned, or rapidly scaled down. Massive amounts of
detailed, highly-contextual knowledge cannot be learned by single
individuals, but has to be preserved and passed on collectively via
embodied, articulated ritual. And a lot of the motivation and
incentive to live in a high-population density area is intimately tied
to serving the niche needs of the dense population itself. A city that
wasn't built in a day cannot be resettled in a day.

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L4nNHt-CuEw width: 600 height: 400)

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Nhsp26bN8U width: 600 height: 400)

Many ancient cities have been devastated by disease epidemics and
invading/marauding armies, never to recover. But only recently has the
prospect of losing all human settlements in a single conflict become a
matter of serious concern. We've all heard of ideas like "being bombed
back to the stone age" and "the next world war being fought with
sticks and stones," but it takes a lot of exposure to scale and some
meditative introspection to truly grasp the danger. Even if a majority
of the human population were to survive a nuclear war, it wouldn't
take much to irrepairably set the clock back for everyone for a very
long time.

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RMo7jUs0GMs width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y__dxTaGEp0 width: 600 height: 400)
(youtube https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1OqND63Bfxs width: 600 height: 400)

We instinctually believe that our civilization does not live in the
buildings, but in the values we hold in our heads. But the ancients
knew better. Values only perpetuated through collective habitual
actions within the context of and in relation to lived spaces. One of
the first, non-bureaucratic and poetic uses of writing systems was for
imperial propaganda,

> The tombs of their earlier and later kings who did not fear Ashur and
Ishtar, my lords, and who had plagued my fathers, I destroyed. I
devastated. I exposed to the sun. Their bones I carried off to
Assyria. I layed restlessness upon their shades. I deprived them of
food offerings and water. For a distance of a month and twenty-five
days of journey I devastated the provinces of Elam. Salt and prickly
plants I scattered over them. The dust of their cities I gathered
together and took to Assyria. The noise of the people, the tread of
cattle and sheep, the glad shouts of rejoicing, I banished from its
fields. Wild asses, gazelles and all kinds of beasts of the plain I
caused to lie down among them, as if at home.

- Ashurbanipal, on defeating the Elamites, 639 BC. Source: "The
Ancient Assyrians" by Mark Healy

> As a hurrican proceeds, I attacked it. And like a storm I overthrew
it. Its inhabitants young and old, I did not spare. And with their
corpses I filled the streets of the city. The town itself and its
houses, from their foundations to their roofs I devastated. I
destroyed, by fire I overthrew. In order that in future, even the soil
of its temples would be forgotten, by water I ravaged it. I turned it
into a pasture. To quite the heart of Ashur, my lord, that people
should bow in submission before his exaulted might, I removed the soil
of Babylon, for presents to the most distant peoples. And I stored up
some of it, in a covered jar.

- Sennacherib, son of Sargon, on the destruction of Babylon

Historian Gwynne Dyre aptly exclaimed that Sennacherib basically nuked
Babylon. And as did the Mongols when the Tigris ran red with blood and
black with ink. Or indeed, when Rome sacked Carthage. Or when the
thundering Dardanelles cannons of the Ottomans brought down the
Byzantine fortifications of Constantinople, which had protected the
city for 1,500 years.

And yet, Baghdad prevails! Carthage lives under the Tunisian
governate. And Istanbul thrives. So perhaps we are too quick to jump
to romantic notions of abandoned numenera. And to quote this anonymous
(link:
https://rebrn.com/re/xenephon-writes-about-huge-abandoned-cities-in-persia-why-didnt-3000741/
text: "internet historian"),

> Even so, it should be said that Assyria did remain populated, insofar
as it could sustain self-reliant communities of farmers. Xenophon's
image of emptiness and desolation is exaggerated. There is some
archaeological evidence for continued habitation in small parts of the
former metropolis of Assyria all the way down to the Parthian period,
and some cities in the area were linked up to the Persian network of
royal roads, showing they had at least some significance as
waystations or local administrative centres. Indeed, in his
description of Kalhu, Xenophon himself notes that some local people
fled to the top of a crumbling ziggurat at the edge of the city when
they saw the Greeks approaching, and a few days beyond Nineveh the
Greek army encountered rural villages that contained "an abundance of
grain" (Anabasis 3.4.18). Clearly, old Assyria was not entirely
abandoned.

All of these concepts amalgamate nicely into a single package in the
case of Angkor Wat, one of the largest religious monuments in the
world. The story goes that Henri Mouhot, a French naturalist, set off
at around 1860 to explore the mostly uncharted forests of Siam,
Cambodia, and Laos and collect botanical and insect specimens. His
expedition was being funded by the Royal Geographical Society and the
Zoological Society of London. One one such outing, which involved some
significant hardships and threats from wild animals, he is said to
have come across Angkor - a vast area filled with ruins of temples,
moats, terraces, and pools. He kept detailed records and drawings of
the ruins in his travel journals, which were published after he died
from Malaria in the same jungles, resulting in the popularization of
Angkor in the western hemisphere.

(image: sketch_01.jpg)
(image: sketch_02.jpg)
(image: sketch_03.jpg caption: Sketches of Angkor ruins by Henri Mouhot, sourced from wikimedia commons)
PIC sketches by Henri Mouhot

> One of these temples—a rival to that of Solomon, and erected by some
ancient Michael Angelo—might take an honourable place beside our most
beautiful buildings. It is grander than anything left to us by Greece
or Rome, and presents a sad contrast to the state of barbarism in
which the nation is now plunged.

- Henri Mouhot, Voyage dans les royaumes de Siam, de Cambodge, de Laos

Information about the ruins and their former occupants was soon put
together using the travel accounts of a visiting Chinese diplomat,
Zhou Daguan, from the 13th century. The temple complex was a mausoleum
constructed under the patronage of the Khmer ruler Suryavarman II in
the early part of the 12th century. Less than 30 years after his
death, the Angkor was sacked by the Chams, causing his successor
Jayavarman VII to move the capital a few kilometers north. The next
few centuries were considered a bloody period of war in the region,
not least because of the rise of Siam as a new competing empire
further up north. The repeated raids and dwindling incentives for
large populations to inhabit the area were considered the common
causes for the abandoment of Angkor.

(image: angkor.jpg caption: Angkor Wat, sourced from wikimedia commons)

In December 2015, however, researchers at the University of Sydney
used new satellite imagery and plane-mounted ground-penetrating LiDAR
to discover many, previously undiscovered ruins in the area, and most
importantly, a vast network of canals, reservoirs, and other
hydraulics infrastructure. There was evidence of infrastructure
collapse and stopgap solutions to meet stressful demands. New theories
emerged, centered around the canals as conduits for transportation of
building materials, trade, and irrigation. The aquatic projects seemed
necessary for supporting the large population density. But the
intensive development seemed to have affect the water table and
flooding patterns. Continued diversion of resources to ambitious
construction projects, and a changing climate may have overstrained
the waterways to the point where ad-hoc repairs kludged on the go
began to systematically fail, lending to another hypothesis for said
abandonment.

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o6Kq4XF1zKU)

And finally, to tie up that nagging lose end, Angkor was never truly,
fully abandoned in a complete sense. The Zoological Society may have
tried to push Henri Mouhot as the discoverer of Angkor to generate
press, but there have been continuous accounts by European merchants
and friars, and Japanese Buddhist pilgrims all throughout the
intervening period. By the 17th century, Angkor Wat had turned from a
Hindu temple to a Buddhist one. Whether or not the change in state
religion precipitated, or was in turn caused, by the Khmer's move away
from opulent architechtural endeavors is up for debate.

(image: monk_dwelling.jpg caption: Monk dwellings near Angkor, 1909
photograph by Pierre Dieulefils. (link: Also see:
https://alisonincambodia.wordpress.com/2013/09/ text: source))

(image: refugees.jpg caption: Refugees in 1970s living in
Angkor. Published in "A Century in Asia" by Catherine Clémentin-Ojha
and Pierre-Yves Manguin. (link: Also see:
https://alisonincambodia.wordpress.com/2013/09/ text: source))


So maybe we are partly to blame for the "Abandoned Ancient Ruins"
phenomena. The notion is too romantic for us to wish it not to be
true. Henri mistakenly dated the structures to the Roman times, and
attributed them to an ancient extinct civilization predating the
Khmers. Striking, since descendants of the Khmer were still in the
area during his time. He wrote,

> At Ongcor, there are ...ruins of such grandeur... that, at the first
view, one is filled with profound admiration, and cannot but ask what
has become of this powerful race, so civilized, so enlightened, the
authors of these gigantic works?

Had the local villagers read his work, they would have remarked, "That
was us! We are right here you git!!" The ruins had become part of the
landscape of the local peasantry who had cultivated those lands for
all these years. They treat the temple ruins as if "it built itself,"
or that "they have always been there, since the dawn of time."  Don't
we all?

Extra credit homework: (link:
https://readcomiconline.to/Comic/The-Sandman-1989/Issue-50?id=14275
text: Read Sandman issue 50.)

Extra extra credit: Research the Kushan empire


